---
title: "Platforms develop own models of closed sharing"
---
While open movement organisations have been  promoting an approach to sharing that is platform agnostic and based on standardized public licensing, sharing economy platforms have managed to build closed systems. These  facilitate sharing within their boundaries,  based on standardized terms and conditions. This approach has allowed platforms to minimize the friction of sharing.
Social media creates ecosystems where sharing is encouraged, but everything is meant to take place only within the space of a given service. The boundaries of these spaces are strongly guarded, as demonstrated by Instagram’s curbing of hyperlinks or Facebook’s warnings displayed upon leaving its webpage. Within these boundaries, platforms  support high levels of creativity and at the same time have total rule over their  content ecosystems.
As a result, most of today's sharing of cultural expression takes place on commercial platforms. This development has gone hand in hand with the increased importance of mobile internet use, which has shifted user interaction away from the open internet towards largely self-contained apps.
In these ecosystems, free licensing - the principal tool of the open movement - is largely useless and at best serves to signal an ideological position, without practical effects. Coded functionalities provide greater gains for creators and users than legal tools do. And the right to remix has been secured by other means than flexible licensing — for better or worse. In this sense, Lessig's mantra "code, not law" has been his best prediction about the future of the internet.
